\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@settitle Guide to the Gorm application
@setfilename Gorm.info
@c %**end of header
@defcodeindex cl
@defcodeindex pr

@include version.texi

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Gorm::                      The GNUstep Graphical Object Relationship Modeler
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the features and implementation of the Gorm
application.

Copyright (C) 1999,2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through @TeX{} and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' and
this permission notice may be included in translations approved by the
Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@iftex
@finalout
@c @smallbook
@c @cropmarks
@end iftex

@titlepage
@title Guide to the
@title Gorm application
@sp 3
@c @subtitle last updated February, 2001
@subtitle Version @value{GORM-VERSION}
@subtitle (for use with @samp{gnustep-gui} version @value{GNUSTEP-VERSION})
@subtitle (and with @samp{gnustep-base} version 1.10.0)
@author Gregory John Casamento <greg_casamento@@yahoo.com>
@author Richard Frith-Macdonald <richard@@brainstorm.co.uk>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999,2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.


Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the author instead of in the original
English.

@strong{Note: The Gorm application is in alpha release. You will
be performing a valuable service if you report any bugs you encounter.}

@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top, Copying, , 

@menu
* Copying::	    GNU Public License says how you can copy
                    and share Gorm.
* Contributors::    People who have contributed to Gorm.
* Installation::    How to build and install Gorm.
* News::	    The latest changes to Gorm.

* Overview::        Gorm in brief.
* Usage::	    How Gorm is used.
* Implementation::  Implementation notes.

* Concept Index::
@end menu

@node Copying, Contributors, Top, Top
@unnumbered Copying

See the file @samp{COPYING}.

@node Contributors, Installation, Copying, Top
@unnumbered Contributors to Gorm

@itemize @bullet
@item
Gregory John Casamento <greg_casamento@@yahoo.com> Is the
current maintaner of Gorm.   Has implemented lots of new
features and rewritten large portions of the existing code.
@item
Richard Frith-Macdonald <richard@@brainstorm.co.uk> wrote
the original version of Gorm as part of the GNUstep project.
@item
Pierre-Yves Rivaille <gnustep@@rivaille.net> Is also a 
major contributor to the Gorm application.
@end itemize

@node Installation, News, Contributors, Top
@chapter Installing Gorm

@include install.texi

@node News, Overview, Installation, Top
@chapter News

@include news.texi

@subsection To Do

@itemize @bullet

@item Debug and stabilize existing code.

@end itemize

@node Overview, Usage, News, Top
@chapter Overview

Gorm is an application for creating the user interface (and possibly entire
applications) for a GNUstep application.  Initially a close clone of the old
NeXTstep 3.3 Interface Builder application, I expect that Gorm will mutate
beyond the capabilities of that app.

GNUstep is an object-oriented programming framework and a collection of tools
developed for or using the GNUstep libraries.

You can find out more about GNUstep at
@url{http://www.gnustep.org}@*

The basic idea behind Gorm is simple - it provides a graphical user interface
with which to connect together objects from the GNUstep libraries (as well as
custom-written objects) and set their attributes in an easy to use manner.

The collection of objects is then saved as a document which can either be
re-loaded into Gorm for further editing, or can be loaded into a running
GNUstep application in order to provide that application with a user
interface or some subsystem.

@section What You Must Know To Understand This Manual

This manual assumes a working knowledge of Objective-C and C.  These are 
necessary prerequisites to understanding some of the technical details and 
examples given here.

@subsection Major features
@cindex features

@itemize @bullet
@item Drag-and-drop creation of GUI elements from palettes.
@item Run-time loading of additional palettes that may be written using an API
very similar to that of Apple/NeXTs interface Builder palette API.
@item Direct on-screen manipulation of GUI elements
@item Manipulation and examination of objects via inspectors.
@item Drag-and-drop creation of connections between objects.
@item Interactive test mode for interfaces/object-networks under development.
@item Saving data in a format loadable by GNUstep applications.
@end itemize

@section About this Manual

This manual is ment to cover basic operation of the Gorm application.  It is not
meant to be a complete tutorial on GNUstep programming. 

@node Usage, Implementation, Overview, Top
@chapter Usage

Here is a description of the menu structure and what each menu does -

@itemize @bullet
@item Info @*
The @samp{Info} menu item produces a submenu ...
@itemize @bullet
@item Info Panel @*
A panel giving very limited information about Gorm
@item Preferences (not implemented) @*
A panel allowing you to set preferences about how Gorm operates
@item Help (not implemented) @*
A panel providing general help on using Gorm
@end itemize

@item Document @*
The @samp{Document} menu item produces a submenu ...
@itemize @bullet
@item Open @*
This produces an open panel that lets you open a Gorm document.
You use this if you want to use Gorm to edit an exisiting document.
@item New Application @*
This creates a new application document within Gorm, you may then use the
Palettes panel to drag new objects into the document.
@item New Module @*
Contains a submenu, which also contains:

@itemize @bullet
@item New Empty @* 
produces an empty document with only NSFirst and NSOwner.
@item New Inspector @* 
produces a document with NSOwner, NSFirst and a window which is the correct size for an Inspector.
@item New Palette @* 
produces a document which is like the one by @samp{New Inspector}, but it's window is the right size for a Palette. 
@end itemize

@item Save @*
This saves the current document
@item Save As @*
This saves the current document to a new file and changes the document name
to match the new name on disk.
@item Save All @*
This saves all documents currently being edited by Gorm.
@item Revert To Saved @*
This removes all changes made to the document sunce the last save, or since
the document was opened.
@item Test Interface @*
This provides interactive testing of the active document.  To end testing, you
need to select the @samp{quit} menu item.
@item Miniaturize @*
This miniaturises the active document (or whatever panel is currently key).
@item Close @*
This closes the currenly active document.
@item Debug @*
Prints some useful internal information.
@item Load Sound @*
Loads a sound into the .gorm file.
@item Image @*
Loads an image into the .gorm file.
@end itemize

@item Edit @*
In addition to the usual Cut, Copy, Paste, Delete Select All, this menu also contains:

@itemize @bullet
@item Group @*
Which produces a submenu
@itemize @bullet
@item In Splitview @*
Groups views into an NSSplitView.   Gorm does this based on the relative positions of the views being grouped.  It determines the orientation and the order of th views and then groups them either vertically or horizontally in the order they appear on the screen.
@item In Box @*
Simply groups all of the views into one NSBox.
@item In ScrollView @*
Simply groups all of the views into one NSScrollView.
@item Ungroup @*
Ungroups the contained views.
@end itemize

@item Set Name @*
This allows the user to set a name for a given object in the Objects view in the main document window.

@item Disable Guideline @*
This item toggles between Enable Guideline and Disable Guideline.  This allows the user to turn on or off the guides which appear when placing views in a window or view in Gorm.

@end itemize

@item Classes @*
Contains menus for working with classes.
@itemize @bullet
@item Create Subclass @*
Creates a subclass of the currently selected class in the current document classes view.
@item Load Class @*
Loads a class from a .h file into the current document.
@item Create Class Files @*
Generates a .h and .m file from the currently selected class in the current document classes view.
@item Instantiate @*
Creates an instance of the selected class in the current document classes view.
@item Add Outlet/Action @*
Adds an outlet or an action depending on what is selected in the document classes view.  If the outlet icon is selected, it will add an outlet, if it the action icon is selected it will add an action.
@item Remove @*
Removes the currently selected outlet, action or class.
@end itemize

@item Tools @*
Contains the inspector and the palette menus
@itemize @bullet
@item Inspector @*
Shows the inspector
@item Palette @*
Shows the palette
@item Load Palette @*
Opens a file panel and allows the user to load a palette into Gorm.
@end itemize

@item Windows @*
Shows currently open windows.

@item Services @*
Shows currently available services.

@item Hide @*
Hides the application.

@item Quit @*
Quits the application.

@end itemize

@node Implementation, Concept Index, Usage, Top
@chapter Implementation

@menu
* Preferences::
@end menu

@section Notes on implementation

The IB documentation on how object selection is managed and how editors and
inspectors are used is unclear ... so I've gone my own way.

1. When a document is loaded, the document object creates an editor attached
to each top-level object in the user interface (NSMenu and NSWindow objects).

These editors must be aware of their edited objects being clicked upon, and
clicking on one of these should cause the corresponding editor to become the
active editor.

The active editor is responsible for handling selection of the edited object
(and any objects below it in the object hierarchy).  Upon change of selection,
the editor is responsible for sending an IBSelectionChangedNotification with
the selection owner (normally the editor itsself) as the notification owner.

The main application watches for these notifications in order to keep track
of who has the selection.

@section Connections

The connection API is the same as that for IB, but with the extension that the
document object must implement [-windowAndRect:forObject:] to return the
window in which the object is being displayed, and the rectangle enclosing
the object (in window base coordinates).

This information is needed by Gorm so that it can mark the connection.

The editors mananging the drag-and-drop operation for a connection must call
@samp{[NSApp -displayConnectionBetween:and:]} to tell Gorm to update its display.  This method sets the values currently returned by @samp{[NSApp -connectSource]} and @samp{[NSApp -connectDestination]}.

@node Preferences, , Implementation, Implementation
@chapter Preferences
@cindex preferences
@cindex defaults

The preferences panel contains a number of useful customizable options which can be used to modify the behavior of Gorm.

Some of these defaults can be safely modified from the command line by the user.
@itemize @bullet

@item PreloadHeaders @*
The user can define a set of headers to load when Gorm starts creation of a new .gorm file.   
This is useful when the user is building a framework or a set of interfaces for a large 
application.

@item ShowInspectors @*
Controls whether the inspector shows when Gorm is started.

@item ShowPalettes @*
Controls whether the palettes window shows when Gorm is started.

@item BackupFile @*
Determines if the old .gorm is moved to .gorm~ when the modified version is saved.

@end itemize

@chapter Basic Concepts

This chapter will explain some of the basic things you need to understand before starting work on a new application.

@section Getting Started

First you need to understand a few basic concepts.   Gorm's main window includes a few standard entries which must be explained before we can proceed.

They are:

@cindex NSOwner
@cindex NSFirst
@cindex NSFont

@itemize @bullet

@item NSOwner

@item NSFirst

@item NSFont

@end itemize

@section What is NSOwner?

NSOwner is the class which ``owns'' the interface.  This is, by default, NSApplication, but it can be any class you like.   You can change it by selecting NSOwner in the document window and going to the ``Custom Class'' inspector in the inspectors window.  From there, you should see all of the classes which the NSOwner can assume.   We'll discuss more about this later when we go over how to create a new application

@section What is NSFirst?

NSFirst is your interface to the responder chain.  NSFirst is representative of the current ``first responder'' in the application.  When you want a message, such as a changeFont: message, to go to the current first responder from, say, a menu, you connect the menu item to the NSFirst object in the document window.  By doing this, it means that whichever object has first responder status at that time in the application will become the reciever of the ``changeFont:'' message. 

@subsection Responders
@cindex NSResponder

A responder is any subclass of NSResponder.  This includes NSWindow, NSView and all of the NSControl subclasses.

@subsection The Responder Chain
@cindex Responder Chain

The responder chain is a sequence of objects which are called to determine where a message sent to the first responder will go.   A message invoked on the first responder will be invoked on the first object in the responder chain which responds to that message.

The object which this message will be called on is determined in the method [NSApplication targetForAction:].  The call sequence is as follows, it will only proceed to the next step in each case if the current step fails to respond to the message which was invoked:

@itemize @bullet

@item The firstResponder of the keyWindow, if one exists. 
@item Iterates through all responders by pulling each in the linked list of responders for the key window.   
@item It then tries the keyWindow.
@item Then the keyWindow's delegate
@item if the application is document based it tries the document controller object for the key window.
@item then it tries the mainWindow's list of responders (as above)
@item the mainWindow's delegate
@item if the app is document based, it tries the document controller for the main window
@item and finally, it tries the NSApplication delegate.

@end itemize

If all of the options in this list are exhausted, it then gives up and returns nil for the object which is to respond.

@section What is NSFont?

NSFont represents the NSFontManager object for the application.  This object is a shared singleton.   This means that, for any given app, there should be only one instance of the object.   This object is generally added to the document window when another objec, such as a Font menu item, is added to the interface, which, in turn, requires that this object be added to the document.

@section The awakeFromNib method

This method is called on any custom object which is unarchived from a nib/gorm file.   This method is called on all objects after the entire archive has been loaded into memory and all connections have been made.   Given all of this, you should not make any assumptions at all about which objects have been called and which have not.  You should not release any objects in this method.

@chapter Creating an Application

If you have ProjectCenter, you need to open it and create an ``Application'' project.   Create it with the name ``FirstApp''.   From there you can open the MainMenu.gorm by clicking on interfaces and selecting MainMenu.gorm.   If Gorm.app is properly installed, you Gorm should start up.

If you don't have ProjectCenter, you can create the Gorm file by hand.    First you need to start Gorm.  You can either do this by doing @samp{gopen Gorm.app} from a command line prompt, or you can invoke it from the Dock or from the workspace's file viewer.
 
You then need to select the @samp{Document} menu, and then @samp{New Application}.  This should produce a new document window, with a menu and an empty window.  This should be the same as with the ProjectCenter gorm file since this is the basic starting point for an application.

For the sections below...  only do one or the other, not both. 

@section Creating A Class In Gorm
@cindex Creating Classes

There are two ways to do this next operation.  I will take you through each step by step.  First click on the classes icon in the toolbar on the top of the Gorm document window.   You should see the view below change to an outline view containing a list of class names.   Once this happens we're ready to create a class.
Select the class you wish to subclass in the outline view.  For our example we will use the simplest: NSObject.  Select it by clicking on the class name once.  Then go to the Classes menu in the main menu and select Create Subclass (you can also type Alt-Shift-c, which will do this as well.  The new class will be created in the list with the name ``NewClass''.

@section Using The Outline View
@cindex Classes Outline View

From here double click on the subclass name to make it editable.  Type the name of the class and hit enter.  For our example, please use the class name MyController.  When you hit enter an alert panel will appear and warn you about breaking connections, simply select OK and continue.

This method of inputting the classes was inspired by IB in OPENSTEP 4.2/Mach which had functionality very similar to this.  For users of that the transition to Gorm will be seamless.

@subsection Adding Outlets In The Outline View

Too add an outlet, select the round icon with the two horizontal lines in it (it sort of looks like a wall outlet.   This should become depressed.  Here you need to go to the Gorm Menu, under Classes select ``Add Outlet/Action''.  Each time you press this menu item another outlet will be added with a name similar to newOutlet, as you add more the number at the end will increase.  For now add only one outlet.

To rename the outlet simply double click it and change it's name like you did the class above to ``value'' for the sake of our example.

@subsection Adding Actions In the Outline View

The procedure to add on action is precisely the same as adding an outlet, except you must click on the button which looks like a target (a circle with a + inside).   Add an action and name it ``buttonPressed:'' for the sake of our example.

@section Using The Class Edit Inspector
@cindex Class Edit Inspector

This way is much more inline with the ``OPENSTEP/GNUstep'' philosophy.   For each object there is an inspector, even for Class objects.

Once you have created the class as described in the previous section ``Creating a Class In Gorm'', you must skip to this section to use the inspector.   In the Gorm main menu select Tools and then select ``Inspectors''.  This will make certain that the inspectors window is being displayed.   Once the inspectors window is up move the pulldown on the top to ``Attributes'' and select the class you created which should, at this point, have the name ``NewClass''.  You'll notice that the ``Class'' field at the top which shows the name's background color has turned white, instead of grey.  This indicates that this class name is editable.   Erase ``NewClass'' from the text field and type ``MyController''.

@subsection Adding Outlets In The Inspector

Adding outlets is very intuitive in the inspector.  Simply select the ``Outlets'' tab in the tab view and click ``Add'' to add more outlets, and ``Remove'' to remove them.  For the sake of our example, add one outlet and name it ``value''.

@subsection Adding Actions In the Inspector

Very much like above only with the ``Actions'' tab, add an action called button pressed.

@section Instantiating The Class
@cindex Instantiating

In the Classes outline view select the new class you've created, now called MyController and then go to the Gorm menu and select Classes, and then Instantiate.  The document window should shift from the classes view to the objects view.   Amoung the set of objects should be a new object called MyController.

@section Adding Controls from the Palette

Go to the Gorm menu and select Tools, then Palettes.  This will bring the palette window to the front.  The second palette from the left is the ``ControlsPalette''.  Select that one and find the button object (it should have the word ``Button'' in it).  Drag that to the window and drop it anywhere you like.

Repeat this operation with the text field.  It's the control with ``Text'' in it.   We are now ready to start making connections between different objects in the document.

@subsection Making Connections
@cindex Connections

The type of application we are creating is known as a ``NSApplication delegate'' this means that the MyController object will be set as the delegate of NSApplication.

To make this connection click on NSOwner and hold down the Control button, keep it pressed as you drag from the NSOwner object to the MyController object.  The inspectors window should change to the Connections inspector and should show two outlets ``delegate'' and ``menu''.   Select the ``delegate'', at this point you should see a green S and a purple T on the NSOwner and MyController objects respectively, and press the ``Connect'' button in the inspector.   In the ``Connections'' section of the inspector you should see an entry which looks similar to ``delegate (MyController)'' this indicates that the connection has been made.

Now we need to make connections from the controller to the textfield and from the controller to the button.  Select the MyController object and Control-Drag (as before) from the object to the text field, this will make an outlet connection.   You should see the connections inspector again, this time select the ``value'' outlet and hit Connect. 

Next, control-drag from the button to the controller, this will make an action connection.  The connections inspector should again appear.  This time you need to select the ``target'' outlet, to get the list of actions.  The list should have only one entry, which is ``buttonPressed:'' since this is the one we added earlier.  Press Connect.  You should see an entry like ``buttonPressed: (MyController'' in the Connections section of the inspector.

It is also possible to make this connection to NSFirst, but to keep things simple, make it directly to the object.   If you make the connection to buttonPressed: on NSFirst the functionality of the application will be unchanged, but the invocation will take the path described above in the section which describes ``The Responder Chain''.

@section Saving the gorm file
@cindex Saving

At this point you must save the .gorm file.  Go to the Gorm menu and click Documents and then select ``Save''.  If the document was opened from a pre-existing .gorm, it will save to that same file name.   If it is an UNTITLED .gorm file a file dialog will appear and you will need to select the directory where you want to store the .gorm file and type the name of the .gorm file.  

@section Generating .h and .m files from the class.

This is different than saving, some people have gotten this confused with the idea of Gorm generating the code for the gui.  Gorm does nothing of the sort (grin).  

Go to the Classes section in the Document window and select the MyController class yet again.  Now go to the Gorm menu and select Classes and the select ``Create Class Files''.  This will bring up a file panel and it allow you to select the directory in which to put the files.   It will first create the MyController.m file and then the MyController.h file.  Simply select the directory in which your app will reside and hit okay for both.  You can change the names, but the default ones, which are based on the class name, should be sufficient.  When you look at the .m for this class, you should see the @samp{buttonPressed:} method with the commecnt @samp{/* insert your code here */} in it.  Delete this comment and add @samp{[value setStringValue: @@``Hello''];}.   The class should look like this after you're done:



/* All Rights reserved */



#include <AppKit/AppKit.h>

#include "MyController.h"

@@implementation MyController


- (void) buttonPressed: (id)sender

@{

    [value setStringValue: @@''Hello''];

@}

@@end



You recall, we connected the textfield to the ``value'' variable.  The call above causes the method setStringValue to be invoked on the textfield you added to the window.  

Also, note that the name of the method is ``buttonPressed:''.  This is the action which is bound to the button.  When it is pressed the text in the textfield should change to ``Hello''.

You now need to build the application either by copying in a GNUmakefile and making the appropriate changes or by using ProjectCenter's build capability, depending on if you use it or not.

This app is available as ``SimpleApp'' in the Examples directory under the Documentation directory distributed with Gorm.   Hopefully this has helped to demonstrate, albeit on a small scale, the capabilities of Gorm.  In later chapters we will cover more advanced application architectures and topics.

@chapter Another Simple Application

This chapter will describe an application, very much like the previous one, but using a slightly different structure.  This application builds on the previous application and uses WinController as the NSOwner of the app instead of making it the delegate of NSApplication.

@section Adding Menu Items

Select the first palette in the palette window, this should be the MenusPalette.   The palette will have a bunch of pre-made menu items on it that you can add.  We want to keep this simple, so grab the one called ``Item'' and drag it over to the menu in main menu nib (the menu on the screen, not the one in the objects view).  As you have this object over the menu, the copy/paste mouse cursor should appear (it looks something like one box over another box at a 45 degree angle).   Where you drop the menu determines it's position in the menu.  You can always drag it to a new position after you've placed it by simply selecting and dragging up or down.  Once you've placed the menu item, double click on the title and change it to ``Open''

You can also change the name in the NSMenuItem attributes inspector.  Now you must add openWindow: to MyController and make the connection from the ``Open'' menu item to NSFirst.   In the connections inspector, find the ``openWindow:'' action.   You could simply make the connection directly, but this is an exaple to show you that this connection will work as well.   Whichever object has First Responder status will be tested to see if it responds to this method.

The implementation for openWindow: in MyController should simply be:

- (void) openWindow: (id) sender

@{

    winController = [[WinController alloc] init];

@}

Also add the winController attribute and an include to allow WinController to be referenced in the MyController.m file.

@section Making a Controller-based .gorm file

Create a new .gorm file as described in the previous section using the ``New Module'' menu item.  Under ``New Module'' select ``New Empty''.  This should produce a .gorm file with only NSOwner and NSFirst.   From the WindowsPalette (which should be the second palette in the palette window) drag a window to the location where you want it to appear on the screen.   In the window add a button called ``Close''.

Go through the same steps you went through previously to create MyController, except for adding the outlets/actions, but this time with the name WinController.   Add an outlet called window and an action called ``closeWindow:''.   

@cindex Setting the NSOwner
Now, instead of instantiating the class go back to the objects view and select the NSOwner object.   After that select the ``Custom Class'' inspector.   Look for the entry for WinController and select it.   You now must connect the ``window'' outlet to the Window you added previously.

@cindex Connecting to a Window
Switch back to the objects view, then Control-Drag not to the window on the screen, but to the window's representation in the objects view.  In the connection inspector select the window outlet and click Ok.

Save the .gorm as using the name Controller.gorm in the project directory. 

Generate the Controller.h and Controller.h files as described in the previous section.

@subsection Add the init method to WinController

Add an implementation of the action ``closeWindow:'' to WinController and also an init which loads the gorm/nib file and declares itself as the owner.  Here's how:

/* All Rights reserved */

#include <AppKit/AppKit.h>

#include "WinController.h"

@@implementation WinController

- (id) init

@{

  if((self = [super init]) != nil)

    @{

        if([NSBundle loadNibNamed: @@"Controller" owner: self] == NO)

        @{

                NSLog(@@"Problem loading interface");

                return nil;

        @}

        [window makeKeyAndOrderFront: self];

    @}

  return self;

@}

- (void) closeWindow: (id) sender
@{

  [window close];

@}

- (void) dealloc
@{
  [super dealloc];
  RELEASE(window);
@}

@@end 

The Controller gorm will be loaded and the connections will be made to the current instance, i.e. window will point to the window object instantianted in the .gorm file and all actions declared in the .gorm file which are attached to the object NSOwner will be resolved on self.

@section Running the App

Type the command @samp{open Controller.app} on the command line in the project directory.   Once the application has started it should look very much like the first application.  Select the ``Open'' button from the Menu and you should see the second window pop up, now choose close, this will call the method ``closeWindow:'' which should cause the window to disappear.


@chapter Advanced Topics

This section will cover some topics which won't be of general interest to most users.   The details in this section pertain to the internal workings of Gorm.

@section Gorm file format

The current Gorm file format is basically just a set of objects, encoded one after another in a continuous stream with some markers indicating when a new class starts or which class is encoded. 

@subsection The Name Table

@cindex Name Table
Each object in the .gorm file has a name assigned to it by the application.  This allows Gorm to refer to the objects by a name once they are loaded rather than an address.  Each name is associated with it's object in a dictionary which preserves the overall structure of the GUI which has been created.   

@subsection The Custom Class Table

This is only used when the user has associated a custom class with an existing instance in the gorm file.  If the user has, for instance, added an NSWindow to the gorm, he/she can use the custom class inspector to select a subclass of NSWindow to change to. 

@subsection Connections Array

This array is used to form the connections after the .gorm file is loaded.  The method @samp{[... establishConnection]} is never called on either NSNibControlConnector or NSNibOutletConnector objects while in Gorm.   This prevents the connections from having any effect while they are being edited in Gorm itself.   Once they are loaded, the establishConnection method is called and the connections are made.

@section Custom Class Encoding

Custom objects are an interesting challenge in Gorm.  By definition, custom classes are not known to Gorm, unless they are in a palette (covered elsewhere).   For classes which are not in a palette instances of these classes in Gorm are encoding in one of three ways:

@itemize bullet
@item A Proxy - This is a standin object which takes the place of the custom object.   This is usually used when the superclass of the object is a non-graphical object, such as a controller.  The init message is called on this object when it's unarchived.
@item A Custom View - This is a standin view object similar to the one descrribed above, but it is a subclass of NSView.  When this is used the initWithFrame: message is called on the view instance which is created (based on what view subclass the user selects)
@item A Template Class - Probably the most interesting of the three.  This is a standin class which uses an existing instance created in Gorm to build a custom subclass from.   For instance when a window subclass is created, call it MyWindow, a template class called GSWindowTemplate is used to hold the NSWindow created in Gorm as well as the name of the subclass to be created when the class is unarchived outside of Gorm as well as some additional information.   When the classes are unarchived in the running app, the designated initializer for that class will be invoked, except in the case of NSControl subclasses.  See the Apple documentation for more information.
@end itemize

All custom instances have awakeFromNib invoked on them when they are unarchived from the .gorm file.   This allows the user to do whatever additional setup that needs to be done, such as setting attribute.

@subsection Restrictions On Your Custom Subclasses

The restrictions here are the same as those in Apple's InterfaceBuilder.   In general, you cannot have additional information which is expected to be decoded in an initWithCoder: method from a custom class which uses one of the methods in the previous section.   This is because, by definition, Gorm doesn't know anything about these classes and allowing you to use them in Gorm in this way is a convenience to make it simpler for the developer.  Gorm therefore, must use one of the proxies to encode the class since it cannot encode the class directly.

How can you get your classes into Gorm, you say?   I'm pleased that you asked me that question.  The best way to make your class known to Gorm so that you don't need to worry about the above restriction is to add a palette which contains your class.  In this way, because you're literally linking the class into Gorm, you're making the class and it's structure known to Gorm so that it can encode the class directly.   With the new palette loaded you can load and save classes containing real instances, not proxies, of your class encoded directly in the .gorm file.

@chapter Frequently Asked Questions

@subsection Should I modify the data.classes of file in the .gorm package?

My advice is never to do this, ever.  Some have said that ``they're plain text and I should be able to change them''.   My response to this rather loosely pronounced and weak rationale is that if they are modified I cannot and will not guarantee that Gorm will be able to read them or will function correctly if it does.

@node Concept Index, , Implementation, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
