@c -*-texinfo-*-

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

@section Introduction

Read the NEWS file for the latest user visible changes. Read the INSTALL
file for installation instructions.

Gorm is an acronym for Graphic Object Relationship modeler (or perhaps
GNUstep Object Relationship Modeler).

Gorm is a clone of the NeXTstep `Interface Builder' application for GNUstep.

Gorm is not `gormless' (a Yorkshire dialect word that my parents used when they
spotted me staring, slack-jawed, at the TV).

Gorm is part of the GNUstep project, and is copyrighted by the Free Software
Foundation.

Gorm is released under the GPL - see the file `COPYING' for details.

Little documentation exists. There is a nice basic tutorial
at @url{http://www.gnustep.it/pierre-yves/index.html}.


@section Status

At this point, Gorm is usable only for very simple stuff as it only supports
the most commonly used gui elements.  However, the binary format in which
documents are archived is stable, so documents created using Gorm now should
remain useful.
Interface test mode qorks quite nicely - you really can see things working.

Known problems (things to do) -

@enumerate
@item Documentation - only a tiny start has been made on this!

@item Editors and inspectors need writing for most gui elements -
  scrollviews
  splitviews
  etc etc

@item Support for color and images on buttons etc.
  This requires improved image and color support in the gui library

@item Support for fonts etc
  This requires improved font management support in the gui library
@end enumerate

@section Acknowledgements

Icons - Mostly by Andrew Lindsay.

Code -  GormViewKnobs.m adapted from code by Gerrit van Dyk.



